## @CommunityArchives2022
As the term "community archive" has gained popularity, it has been applied in a variety of ways, including as a way to denote community participation in knowledge creation and preservation in ways that may challenge existing dominant historical and political narratives.[[11]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_archives&oldid=1084521115#cite_note-11)[[12]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_archives&oldid=1084521115#cite_note-12) However, the ambiguity inherent in defining the terms "[community](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Community "Community")" and "[archives](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archive "Archive")" complicates attempts to discuss and define what is meant by "community archives". Therefore, allowing these independent entities to label and define their organizations and missions is one important way to support their activities.[[3]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_archives&oldid=1084521115#cite_note-whose-3)

Whether community archives consider their endeavors to be political, exerting control over community documentation and storytelling inherently calls attention to issues of power manifest in traditional approaches to archival creation and maintenance.[[3]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_archives&oldid=1084521115#cite_note-whose-3) As the interest in, and number of, community archives increase globally, opportunities to document and share these efforts and materials with the general public may result in tension between community archives stakeholders and heritage professionals who are trained with an emphasis on legal, intellectual, and physical control of records.[[3]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_archives&oldid=1084521115#cite_note-whose-3)

Since many community archives develop as independent social spaces, often distinct from mainstream narratives, their organizational champions may resist archival labels and/or intervention by trained professionals out of concern that collections may be absorbed by formal institutions and rendered inaccessible to their communities. Therefore, issues of independence and autonomy tend to be at the forefront of community archival identities, even if they seek partnerships or welcome support from traditional cultural heritage institutions.[[1]](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_archives&oldid=1084521115#cite_note-:0-1)

-

## @WhereArchivistCommunity2019
This is not the only model for archival practice. Community groups should also be empowered to develop their own archives.  As [Jamie Haft](http://roadside.org/news/five-misconceptions-about-documentation-archiving-and-communication-field-community-cultura)argues, lines should not be drawn between “community-based” and “academic,” or “amateur” and “professional.” Rather, archives – as a practice and as construct – can be understood on a continuum of practice between the producers of the content and the preservers.

The [Lesbian Herstory Archives](http://www.lesbianherstoryarchives.org/history.html) exemplifies the success of a community-based archive in which the community defines these practices. In this case, the community defines the way the materials in the archive are preserved, represented, and accessed.  While professional archival standards may inform the practices in these organizations, communities often establish their own standards based on their philosophies and values.

-

## @foundationCommunityArchivesEmpower2019
“Many professional archivists and funders questioned whether a digital-only repository could take preservation issues seriously.”  She also explains that some questioned whether an independent community-based organization could sustainably steward materials, while others claimed the project would not be of interest to a wider audience.  But more than a decade on, the field has shifted.  “Along with an increased awareness of the labor, expertise, and infrastructure needed to sustain and preserve digital materials, there is respect for the work of community archives, and a greater appreciation of the value of the histories of communities of color in the US,” says Caswell.

Indeed, as collections expand, so does the need to implement best practices and invest in infrastructure like climate-controlled storage and research facilities that can accommodate access by a growing number of users.

“It’s incredibly significant for a marginalized group to have evidence that their community has been around a long time,” says Michelle Caswell.  “The emotional impact of seeing yourself existing across space and time is profound.”