---
title: "21. Feb 2022 - Introduction"
date: "2022-02-21"
author: "Adrian Demleitner"
tags:
  - log
  - reflection
---
# 21. Feb 2022
## Introduction

I made myself a memo to think about getting *back* into blogging. Quite a long time ago I had a super tense blog where I tried to be super hype. I blogged because I wanted to have an audience to show all the cool things that I read and watch, in order to convey how cool I am… Didn't succeed 😅

A quick research brings up some nice links on how and why to blog[^1]. Of the many reasons offered, I personally liked the *improve your writing* the best. Now, with my pivot into academia I can't get enough writing practice and a blog will help me out by being a place with little pressure.

A quick note about my setup. Since I'm a programmer I feel quite comfortable with a little nerdy stack. I'm writing in Visual Studio Code with the [foam plugin](https://foambubble.github.io/). I already used this setup for my MA thesis documentation and also to write my thesis paper with the help of pandoc. I then have the whole thing version through git and hosted on github through mkdocs. Maybe I'll write about that some day 😌.

## Related
- A few month ago I made some notes on [research blogs](notes/What%20are%20Research%20Blogs.md) when I tried to improve my thesis documentation.

## Things
- Read [The Anthropological Study of Infrastructure](reading/@erikssonAnthropologicalStudyInfrastructure2016.md) which is a nice primer on … the anthropology of infrastructure (something I'm particularly interested in these days)
- Listening to [Self-titled EP by 桃子假象 Peach Illusion](https://qiiisnacksrecords.bandcamp.com/album/self-titled-ep) on repeat.

## Footnotes

[^1]: For example [Why you (yes, you) should blog](https://medium.com/@racheltho/why-you-yes-you-should-blog-7d2544ac1045) or [9 Reasons To Start A Blog (And 7 Reasons Why You Shouldn’t)](https://bloggingwizard.com/reasons-to-start-a-blog/).
